---
title: "Field Zef"
date: 2013-12-18
---

TATIPRIX is launching next month. It's going to be totally sick and totally incorrect. Here's a preview.

TATIPRIX BUNDLE \#001: "Field Zef"

CONTENTS:

- (1) 140ml TUB of ASSOS CHAMOIS CREME
- (2) TATIPRIX BUTYL INNER TUBES in PROTECTIVE VELVET SATCHELS
- (3) MUSA FIELD NOTES NOTEBOOKS, GRAPH PAPER

That's 6 timeless and classic Zef objects, delivered rapidly to your doorstep via the United States Postal Service for the very reasonable amount of THIRTY FIVE DOLLARS.

### ABOUT ASSOS CHAMOIS CREME

Fabricated in Switzerland by Fritz Keller AG for [ASSOS](www.assos.com/). There is PRO and then there is PRO. ASSOS chamois creme is decidedly in the latter camp. Crack open the tub, take in the menthol aroma, close your eyes, and envision Alpine descents, knees covered in Strada Bianche dust, the squeal of Veloflex Carbons cornering at 75km/hr. You'll want chamois time to be all the time.

### ABOUT TATIPRIX TUBES

Made in Thailand for TATIPRIX. If you must ride clinchers, at least have some respect. Jewel thieves use velvet satchels. As do Crown Royal fans. And now you too will appreciate the understated elegance of a protective velvet satchel for your tubes. Impress your friends! Keep your tubes dry and your valves clean! Also doubles as rad jersey pocket wallet.

### ABOUT FIELD NOTES NOTEBOOKS

Who among us doesn't wish to log all of the epic things we do on our bicycles? [Field Notes](http://fieldnotesbrand.com/) are 48 page memo books for recording dreams, goals, failures, and threshold tests. 5mm graph paper, great for sketching frame geometries or brevet routes. Made in the USA by skilled artisans.
